Introduction

Learning Objectives
By the time you finish this room, you will have learned about the following:
- ISO OSI network model
- IP addresses, subnets, and routing
- TCP, UDP, and port numbers
- How to connect to an open TCP port from the command line

OSI Model

The OSI (Open Systems Interconnection) model is a conceptual model developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) that describes how communications should occur in a computer network. In other words, the OSI model defines a framework for computer network communications. Although this model is theoretical, it is vital to learn and understand as it helps grasp networking concepts on a deeper level. 
The OSI model is composed of seven layers:
Physical Layer
Data Link Layer
Network Layer
Transport Layer
Session Layer
Presentation Layer
Application Layer

"Please Do Not Throw Spinach Pizza Away"

Layer 1: Physical Layer
The physical layer, also referred to as layer 1, deals with the physical connection between devices; this includes the medium, such as a wire, and the definition of the binary digits 0 and 1. Data transmission can be via an electrical, optical, or wireless signal. Consequently, we need data cables or antennas, depending on our physical medium.

Layer 2: Data Link Layer
The physical layer defines a medium to transmit our signal. The data link layer, i.e., layer 2, represents the protocol that enables data transfer between nodes on the same network segment. 
The data link layer describes an agreement between the different systems on the same network segment on how to communicate. 

Layer 2 include Ethernet, i.e., 802.3, and WiFi, i.e., 802.11. Ethernet and WiFi addresses are six bytes. Their address is called a MAC address, where MAC stands for Media Access Control. They are usually expressed in hexadecimal format with a colon separating each two bytes. The three leftmost bytes identify the vendor.

Layer 3: Network Layer
The data link layer focuses on sending data between two nodes on the same network segment. The network layer, i.e., layer 3, is concerned with sending data between different networks. In more technical terms, the network layer handles logical addressing and routing, i.e., finding a path to transfer the network packets between the diverse networks.
