Introduction

first room of the Network Security Module. This module covers:
1.Passive Reconnaissance
2.Active Reconnaissance
3.Nmap Live Host Discovery
4.Nmap Basic Port Scans
5.Nmap Advanced Port Scans
6.Nmap Post Port Scans
7.Protocols and Servers
8.Protocols and Servers 2
9.Network Security Challenge

three command-line tools:
- whois to query WHOIS servers
- nslookup to query DNS servers
- dig to query DNS servers

We use whois to query WHOIS records, while we use nslookup and dig to query DNS database records. These are all publicly available records and hence do not alert the target.

We will also learn the usage of two online services:
- DNSDumpster
- Shodan.io
These two online services allow us to collect information about our target without directly connecting to it.

Pre-requisites: This room requires basic networking knowledge along with basic familiarity with the command line. The modules Network Fundamentals and Linux Fundamentals provide the required knowledge if necessary.

Passive Versus Active Recon

In the Art of War, Sun Tzu taught, “If you know the enemy and know yourself, your victory will not stand in doubt.” If you are playing the role of an attacker, you need to gather information about your target systems. If you are playing the role of a defender, you need to know what your adversary will discover about your systems and networks.

Reconnaissance (recon) can be defined as a preliminary survey to gather information about a target. 
It is the first step in The Unified Kill Chain to gain an initial foothold on a system. We divide reconnaissance into:
1.Passive Reconnaissance: 
you rely on publicly available knowledge. It is the knowledge that you can access from publicly available resources without directly engaging with the target. Think of it like you are looking at target territory from afar without stepping foot on that territory.

Passive reconnaissance activities include many activities, for instance:
- Looking up DNS records of a domain from a public DNS server.
- Checking job ads related to the target website.
- Reading news articles about the target company.

2.Active Reconnaissance: 
cannot be achieved so discreetly. It requires direct engagement with the target. Think of it like you check the locks on the doors and windows, among other potential entry points.

Examples of active reconnaissance activities include:
- Connecting to one of the company servers such as HTTP, FTP, and SMTP.
- Calling the company in an attempt to get information (social engineering).
- Entering company premises pretending to be a repairman.

Question 1: You visit the Facebook page of the target company, hoping to get some of their employee names. What kind of reconnaissance activity is this? (A for active, P for passive)
Ans: P

Question 2: You ping the IP address of the company webserver to check if ICMP traffic is blocked. What kind of reconnaissance activity is this? (A for active, P for passive)
Ans: A

Question 3: You happen to meet the IT administrator of the target company at a party. You try to use social engineering to get more information about their systems and network infrastructure. What kind of reconnaissance activity is this? (A for active, P for passive)
Ans: A

Whois

WHOIS is a request and response protocol that follows the RFC 3912 specification. A WHOIS server listens on TCP port 43 for incoming requests. The domain registrar is responsible for maintaining the WHOIS records for the domain names it is leasing. The WHOIS server replies with various information related to the domain requested. Of particular interest, we can learn:

Registrar: Via which registrar was the domain name registered?
Contact info of registrant: Name, organization, address, phone, among other things. (unless made hidden via a privacy service)
Creation, update, and expiration dates: When was the domain name first registered? When was it last updated? And when does it need to be renewed?
Name Server: Which server to ask to resolve the domain name?

The information collected can be inspected to find new attack surfaces, such as social engineering or technical attacks. For instance, depending on the scope of the penetration test, you might consider an attack against the email server of the admin user or the DNS servers, assuming they are owned by your client and fall within the scope of the penetration test.

Note: due to automated tools abusing WHOIS queries to harvest email addresses, many WHOIS services take measures against this. They might redact email addresses, for instance. Moreover, many registrants subscribe to privacy services to avoid their email addresses being harvested by spammers and keep their information private.

Question 4: When was TryHackMe.com registered?
Ans: 20180705

Question 5: What is the registrar of TryHackMe.com?
Ans: namecheap.com

Question 6: Which company is TryHackMe.com using for name servers?
Ans: cloudflare.com

nslookup and dig

Find the IP address of a domain name using nslookup, which stands for Name Server Look Up. 
You need to issue the command nslookup DOMAIN_NAME, for example, nslookup tryhackme.com. Or, more generally, you can use nslookup OPTIONS DOMAIN_NAME SERVER

These three main parameters are:
- OPTIONS contains the query type as shown in the table below. For instance, you can use A for IPv4 addresses and AAAA for IPv6 addresses.
- DOMAIN_NAME is the domain name you are looking up.
- SERVER is the DNS server that you want to query. You can choose any local or public DNS server to query. Cloudflare offers 1.1.1.1 and 1.0.0.1, Google offers 8.8.8.8 and 8.8.4.4, and Quad9 offers 9.9.9.9 and 149.112.112.112. There are many more public DNS servers that you can choose from if you want alternatives to your ISP’s DNS servers.

Query type	Result
A	        IPv4 Addresses
AAAA	    IPv6 Addresses
CNAME	    Canonical Name
MX	        Mail Servers
SOA	        Start of Authority
TXT	        TXT Records

The A and AAAA records are used to return IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, respectively. This lookup is helpful to know from a penetration testing perspective.

MX mail servers try to connect based on order. We might find mail servers that are not adequately secured or patched.
Such pieces of information might prove valuable as you continue the passive reconnaissance of your target. 

For more advanced DNS queries and additional functionality, you can use dig, the acronym for “Domain Information Groper,” 
use dig DOMAIN_NAME TYPE. Optionally, we can select the server we want to query using dig @SERVER DOMAIN_NAME TYPE.

1.SERVER is the DNS server that you want to query.
2.DOMAIN_NAME is the domain name you are looking up.
3.TYPE contains the DNS record type, as shown in the table provided earlier.

Question 7: Check the TXT records of thmlabs.com. What is the flag there?
Ans: THM{a5b83929888ed36acb0272971e438d78}

DNSDumpster

To avoid such a time-consuming search, one can use an online service that offers detailed answers to DNS queries, such as DNSDumpster. 
If we search DNSDumpster for tryhackme.com, we will discover the subdomain blog.tryhackme.com, which a typical DNS query cannot provide. In addition, DNSDumpster will return the collected DNS information in easy-to-read tables and a graph. 
DNSDumpster will also provide any collected information about listening servers.

Question 8: Lookup tryhackme.com on DNSDumpster. What is one interesting subdomain that you would discover in addition to www and blog?
Ans: remote

Shodan.io

When you are tasked to run a penetration test against specific targets, as part of the passive reconnaissance phase, a service like Shodan.io can be helpful to learn various pieces of information about the client’s network, without actively connecting to it. 
Furthermore, on the defensive side, you can use different services from Shodan.io to learn about connected and exposed devices belonging to your organization.

Question 9: According to Shodan.io, what is the 2nd country in the world in terms of the number of publicly accessible Apache servers?
Ans: China

Question 10: Based on Shodan.io, what is the 3rd most common port used for Apache?
Ans: 8080

Question 11: Based on Shodan.io, what is the 3rd most common port used for nginx?
Ans: 5001

Summary

Purpose	                                    Commandline Example
Lookup WHOIS record	                        whois tryhackme.com
Lookup DNS A records	                    nslookup -type=A tryhackme.com
Lookup DNS MX records at DNS server	        nslookup -type=MX tryhackme.com 1.1.1.1
Lookup DNS TXT records	                    nslookup -type=TXT tryhackme.com
Lookup DNS A records	                    dig tryhackme.com A
Lookup DNS MX records at DNS server	        dig @1.1.1.1 tryhackme.com MX
Lookup DNS TXT records	                    dig tryhackme.com TXT
