Room: Windows Command Line

Introduction

Learning Objectives
The purpose of this room is to teach you how to use MS Windows Command Prompt cmd.exe, the default command-line interpreter in the Windows environment. We will learn how to use the command line to:

Display basic system information
Check and troubleshoot network configuration
Manage files and folders
Check running processes
Room Prerequisites
Before starting this room, you should have finished the Windows and AD Fundamentals module.

Question 1: What is the default command line interpreter in the Windows environment?
Ans:cmd.exe

Basic System Information

1.set command  provides details on path variable.
2.ver command  provides OS version.
3.systeminfo command provides details on system information like hostname, version, etc.
4.driverquery command provides details the installed device drivers.

Note: In order view the output in page format we can use the pipe(|) operater. example: " driverquery | more "

Question 2: What is the OS version of the Windows VM?
Ans:10.0.20348.2655

Question 3: What is the hostname of the Windows VM?
Ans: WINSRV2022-CORE

Network Configuration

ipconfig provides details on the network configuration on the system.
ipconfig /all  provides details on all the network configuration on the system.

Network Troubleshooting

One common troubleshooting task is checking if the server can access a particular server on the Internet.
Done using the ping command. syntax: ping <target_name>

What ping verifies?
Send a specific ICMP packet and listen for a response. If a response is received, we know that we can reach the target and that the target can reach us.

What is the functionality of tracert?
tracert, which stands for trace route. The command tracert target_name traces the network route traversed to reach the target. 
Without getting into more details, it expects the routers on the path to notify us if they drop a packet because its time-to-live (TTL) has reached zero. 

More Networking Commands

What is the functionality of nslookup?
nslookup. It looks up a host or domain and returns its IP address. 

What is the functionality of netstat?
netstat, This command displays current network connections and listening ports. A basic netstat command with no arguments will show you established connections

netstat -h, where -h displays the help page

Few options available on netstat are:
-a displays all established connections and listening ports
-b shows the program associated with each listening port and established connection
-o reveals the process ID (PID) associated with the connection
-n uses a numerical form for addresses and port numbers

Question 4: Which command can we use to look up the server’s physical address (MAC address)?
Ans: ipconfig /all

Question 5: What is the name of the process listening on port 3389?
Ans: TermService

Question 6: What is the subnet mask?
Ans: 255.255.0.0

File and Disk Management

Working With Directories

cd without parameters to display the current drive and directory. It is the equivalent of asking the system, where am I?
view the child directories using dir.

Few options that can be used as part of dir command are:
dir /a - Displays hidden and system files as well.
dir /s - Displays files in the current directory and all subdirectories.

tree to visually represent the child directories and subdirectories.
change to any directory by using the command cd target_directory
use cd .. to go up one level
To create a directory, use mkdir directory_name; mkdir stands for make directory. 
To delete a directory, use rmdir directory_name; rmdir stands for remove directory.

Working With Files

view text files with the command type, This command will dump the contents of the text file on the screen; this is convenient for files that fit within your terminal window.
more for longer text files. This command will display enough text file contents to fill your terminal window. In other words, for long text files, more will display a single page and wait for you to press Spacebar to move by one page (flip the page) or Enter to move by one line.
copy command allows you to copy files from one location to another.
move files using the move command
delete a file using del or erase
use the wildcard character * to refer to multiple files. For example, copy *.md C:\Markdown will copy all files with the extension md to the directory C:\Markdown.

Question 7: What are the file’s contents in C:\Treasure\Hunt?
Ans: THM{CLI_POWER}

Task and Process Management

list the running processes using tasklist.
check all available filters by displaying the help page using tasklist /?
terminate any task using taskkill /PID target_pid, pid is noting but the process id.

Question 8: What command would you use to find the running processes related to notepad.exe?
Ans: tasklist /FI "imagename eq notepad.exe"

Question 9: What command can you use to kill the process with PID 1516?
Ans: taskkill /PID 1516

Conclusion

chkdsk: checks the file system and disk volumes for errors and bad sectors.
driverquery: displays a list of installed device drivers.
sfc /scannow: scans system files for corruption and repairs them if possible.

Note: important to know that /? can be used with most commands to display a help page.

Question 10: The command shutdown /s can shut down a system. What is the command you can use to restart a system?
Ans: shutdown /r

Question 11: What command can you use to abort a scheduled system shutdown?
Ans: shutdown /a


