Microsoft's Active Directory is the backbone of the corporate world. 
It simplifies the management of devices and users within a corporate environment. In this room, we'll take a deep dive into the essential components of Active Directory.

Room Objectives
1. What Active Directory is
2. What an Active Directory Domain is
3. What components go into an Active Directory Domain
4. Forests and Domain Trust
5. And much more!

Room Prerequisites
General familiarity with Windows.

Module 1: Windows Domain

Points to remember

1.Windows domain is a group of users and computers under the administration of a given business. 
2.The main idea behind a domain is to centralise the administration of common components of a Windows computer network in a single repository called Active Directory (AD). 
3.The server that runs the Active Directory services is known as a Domain Controller (DC).
4. The main advantages of having a configured Windows domain are:
    Centralised identity management: All users across the network can be configured from Active Directory with minimum effort.
    Managing security policies: You can configure security policies directly from Active Directory and apply them to users and computers across the network as needed.

Question 1:
In a Windows domain, credentials are stored in a centralised repository called...
Ans: Active Directory

Question 2:
The server in charge of running the Active Directory services is called...
Ans: Domain Controller

Module 2: Active Directory

Points to remember

1.The core of any Windows Domain is the Active Directory Domain Service (AD DS). 
This service acts as a catalogue that holds the information of all of the "objects" that exist on your network. Amongst the many objects supported by AD, we have users, groups, machines, printers, shares and many others.

Users 
Users are one of the most common object types in Active Directory. Users are one of the objects known as security principals, meaning that they can be authenticated by the domain and can be assigned privileges over resources like files or printers. 

Users can be used to represent two types of entities:
1. People: users will generally represent persons in your organisation that need to access the network, like employees.
2. Services: you can also define users to be used by services like IIS or MSSQL. Every single service requires a user to run, but service users are different from regular users as they will only have the privileges needed to run their specific service.

Machines

Machines are another type of object within Active Directory; for every computer that joins the Active Directory domain, a machine object will be created. Machines are also considered "security principals" and are assigned an account just as any regular user. This account has somewhat limited rights within the domain itself.

Note: Machine Account passwords are automatically rotated out and are generally comprised of 120 random characters.

Machine account naming convention: <Machinename>$

Security groups 

Define user groups to assign access rights to files or other resources to entire groups instead of single users. This allows for better manageability as you can add users to an existing group, and they will automatically inherit all of the group's privileges. Security groups are also considered security principals and, therefore, can have privileges over resources on the network.
Groups can have both users and machines as members. If needed, groups can include other groups as well.

Some important groups in the domain are:
1. Domain Admins: Users of this group have administrative privileges over the entire domain. By default, they can administer any computer on the domain, including the DCs.
2. Server Operators: Users in this group can administer Domain Controllers. They cannot change any administrative group memberships.
3. Backup Operators: Users in this group are allowed to access any file, ignoring their permissions. They are used to perform backups of data on computers.
4. Account Operators: Users in this group can create or modify other accounts in the domain.
5. Domain Users: Includes all existing user accounts in the domain.
6. Domain Computers: Includes all existing computers in the domain.
7. Domain Controllers: Includes all existing DCs on the domain.

Objects are organised in Organizational Units (OUs) which are container objects that allow you to classify users and machines. OUs are mainly used to define sets of users with similar policing requirements. 
Default containers are created by Windows and are listed below:
1. Builtin: Contains default groups available to any Windows host.
2. Computers: Any machine joining the network will be put here by default. You can move them if needed.
3. Domain Controllers: Default OU that contains the DCs in your network.
4. Users: Default users and groups that apply to a domain-wide context.
5. Managed Service Accounts: Holds accounts used by services in your Windows domain.

Security Groups vs OUs

1. OUs are handy for applying policies to users and computers, which include specific configurations that pertain to sets of users depending on their particular role in the enterprise. Remember, a user can only be a member of a single OU at a time, as it wouldn't make sense to try to apply two different sets of policies to a single user.
2. Security Groups, on the other hand, are used to grant permissions over resources. For example, you will use groups if you want to allow some users to access a shared folder or network printer. A user can be a part of many groups, which is needed to grant access to multiple resources.

Question 3: Which group normally administrates all computers and resources in a domain?
Ans: Domain Admins

Question 4: What would be the name of the machine account associated with a machine named TOM-PC?
Ans: TOM-PC$

Question 5: Suppose our company creates a new department for Quality Assurance. What type of containers should we use to group all Quality Assurance users so that policies can be applied consistently to them?
Ans: Organizational Units

Module 3: Managing users in AD 

Delegation 
Allows you to grant users specific privileges to perform advanced tasks on OUs without needing a Domain Administrator to step in.


Question 6: What was the flag found on Sophie's desktop?
Ans:THM{thanks_for_contacting_support}

Question 7: The process of granting privileges to a user over some OU or other AD Object is called...?
Ans: Delegation


Managing Computers in AD

By default, all the machines that join a domain (except for the DCs) will be put in the container called "Computers". 
While there is no golden rule on how to organise your machines, an excellent starting point is segregating devices according to their use. 
In general, you'd expect to see devices divided into at least the three following categories:
1. Workstations
    Workstations are one of the most common devices within an Active Directory domain. Each user in the domain will likely be logging into a workstation. 
This is the device they will use to do their work or normal browsing activities. These devices should never have a privileged user signed into them.

2. Servers
    Servers are the second most common device within an Active Directory domain. 
Servers are generally used to provide services to users or other servers.

3. Domain Controllers
    Domain Controllers are the third most common device within an Active Directory domain. Domain Controllers allow you to manage the Active Directory Domain. 
These devices are often deemed the most sensitive devices within the network as they contain hashed passwords for all user accounts within the environment.

Question 8: After organising the available computers, how many ended up in the Workstations OU? 
Ans: 7

Question 9: Is it recommendable to create separate OUs for Servers and Workstations? (yay/nay)
Ans: yay

Group Policies

    Windows manages such policies through Group Policy Objects (GPO). GPOs are simply a collection of settings that can be applied to OUs. 
GPOs can contain policies aimed at either users or computers, allowing you to set a baseline on specific machines and identities.

To configure GPOs, you can use the Group Policy Management tool.
Something important to have in mind is that any GPO will apply to the linked OU and any sub-OUs under it.
To configure Group Policies, you first create a GPO under Group Policy Objects and then link it to the OU where you want the policies to apply.
The first tab you'll see when selecting a GPO shows its scope, which is where the GPO is linked in the AD.
you can also apply Security Filtering to GPOs so that they are only applied to specific users/computers under an OU. By default, they will apply to the Authenticated Users group, which includes all users/PCs.
The Settings tab includes the actual contents of the GPO and lets us know what specific configurations it applies.

GPO distribution

GPOs are distributed to the network via a network share called SYSVOL, which is stored in the DC. 
All users in a domain should typically have access to this share over the network to sync their GPOs periodically. 
The SYSVOL share points by default to the C:\Windows\SYSVOL\sysvol\ directory on each of the DCs in our network.

Once a change has been made to any GPOs, it might take up to 2 hours for computers to catch up. 
If you want to force any particular computer to sync its GPOs immediately, you can always run the following command on the desired computer:
command: gpupdate /force

Question 10: What is the name of the network share used to distribute GPOs to domain machines?
Ans: sysvol

Question 11: Can a GPO be used to apply settings to users and computers? (yay/nay)
Ans: yay

Authentication Methods

When using Windows domains, all credentials are stored in the Domain Controllers. 
Whenever a user tries to authenticate to a service using domain credentials, the service will need to ask the Domain Controller to verify if they are correct. Two protocols can be used for network authentication in windows domains:

Kerberos: Used by any recent version of Windows. This is the default protocol in any recent domain.
NetNTLM: Legacy authentication protocol kept for compatibility purposes.

Kerberos Authentication:

Kerberos authentication is the default authentication protocol for any recent version of Windows. Users who log into a service using Kerberos will be assigned tickets. 
Think of tickets as proof of a previous authentication. Users with tickets can present them to a service to demonstrate they have already authenticated into the network before and are therefore enabled to use it.

Kerberos Authentication Process:
1. The user sends their username and a timestamp encrypted using a key derived from their password to the Key Distribution Center (KDC), a service usually installed on the Domain Controller in charge of creating Kerberos tickets on the network.
The KDC will create and send back a Ticket Granting Ticket (TGT), which will allow the user to request additional tickets to access specific services. The need for a ticket to get more tickets may sound a bit weird, but it allows users to request service tickets without passing their credentials every time they want to connect to a service. Along with the TGT, a Session Key is given to the user, which they will need to generate the following requests.
Notice the TGT is encrypted using the krbtgt account's password hash, and therefore the user can't access its contents. It is essential to know that the encrypted TGT includes a copy of the Session Key as part of its contents, and the KDC has no need to store the Session Key as it can recover a copy by decrypting the TGT if needed.

2. When a user wants to connect to a service on the network like a share, website or database, they will use their TGT to ask the KDC for a Ticket Granting Service (TGS). TGS are tickets that allow connection only to the specific service they were created for. To request a TGS, the user will send their username and a timestamp encrypted using the Session Key, along with the TGT and a Service Principal Name (SPN), which indicates the service and server name we intend to access.
As a result, the KDC will send us a TGS along with a Service Session Key, which we will need to authenticate to the service we want to access. The TGS is encrypted using a key derived from the Service Owner Hash. The Service Owner is the user or machine account that the service runs under. The TGS contains a copy of the Service Session Key on its encrypted contents so that the Service Owner can access it by decrypting the TGS.

3.The TGS can then be sent to the desired service to authenticate and establish a connection. The service will use its configured account's password hash to decrypt the TGS and validate the Service Session Key.

NetNTLM Authentication:

NetNTLM works using a challenge-response mechanism.

NetNTLM Authentication Process:
1.The client sends an authentication request to the server they want to access.
2.The server generates a random number and sends it as a challenge to the client.
3.The client combines their NTLM password hash with the challenge (and other known data) to generate a response to the challenge and sends it back to the server for verification.
4.The server forwards the challenge and the response to the Domain Controller for verification.
5.The domain controller uses the challenge to recalculate the response and compares it to the original response sent by the client. If they both match, the client is authenticated; otherwise, access is denied. The authentication result is sent back to the server.
6.The server forwards the authentication result to the client.

Note that the user's password (or hash) is never transmitted through the network for security.

Note: The described process applies when using a domain account. If a local account is used, the server can verify the response to the challenge itself without requiring interaction with the domain controller since it has the password hash stored locally on its SAM.

Question 12: Will a current version of Windows use NetNTLM as the preferred authentication protocol by default? (yay/nay)
Ans: nay

Question 13: When referring to Kerberos, what type of ticket allows us to request further tickets known as TGS?
Ans: Ticket Granting Ticket

Question 14: When using NetNTLM, is a user's password transmitted over the network at any point? (yay/nay)
Ans: nay

Trees, Forests and Trusts

Trees

Active Directory supports integrating multiple domains so that you can partition your network into units that can be managed independently. 
If you have two domains that share the same namespace (thm.local in our example), those domains can be joined into a Tree.

This partitioned structure gives us better control over who can access what in the domain.

A new security group needs to be introduced when talking about trees and forests. 
The Enterprise Admins group will grant a user administrative privileges over all of an enterprise's domains. 
Each domain would still have its Domain Admins with administrator privileges over their single domains and the Enterprise Admins who can control everything in the enterprise.

Forests

The union of several trees with different namespaces into the same network is known as a forest.

The domains you manage can also be configured in different namespaces. Suppose your company continues growing and eventually acquires another company called MHT Inc. 
When both companies merge, you will probably have different domain trees for each company, each managed by its own IT department.

Trust Relationships

Domains arranged in trees and forests are joined together by trust relationships to share resourcs with one another.

One-way trust relationship:
The simplest trust relationship that can be established is a one-way trust relationship. In a one-way trust, if Domain AAA trusts Domain BBB, this means that a user on BBB can be authorised to access resources on AAA
The direction of the one-way trust relationship is contrary to that of the access direction.

Two-way trust relationships:
Two-way trust relationships can also be made to allow both domains to mutually authorise users from the other. By default, joining several domains under a tree or a forest will form a two-way trust relationship.

Question 15: What is a group of Windows domains that share the same namespace called?
Ans: Tree

Question 16:What should be configured between two domains for a user in Domain A to access a resource in Domain B?
Ans: A Trust Relationship
